# 6502

## Table of content

- [6502](#6502)
  - [Architecture](#architecture)
  - [Registers](#registers)
    - [Program Conter](#program-counter)
    - [Stack Pointer](#stack-pointer)
    - [Accumulator](#accumulator)
    - [Index Register X](#index-register-x)
    - [Index Register Y](#index-register-y)
    - [Processor Status](#processor-status)
      - [Carry Flag](#carry-flag)
      - [Zero Flag](#zero-flag)
      - [Interrupt Disable](#interrupt-disable)
      - [Decimal Mode](#decimal-mode)
      - [Break Command](#break-command)
      - [Overflow Flag](#overflow-flag)
      - [Negative Flag](#negative-flag)
  - [Instruction Set](#instruction-set)
    - [Load and Store Operations](#load-and-store-operations)
    - [Register Transfers](#register-transfers)
    - [Stack Operations](#stack-operations)
    - [Logic](#logic)
    - [Arithmetic](#arithmetic)
    - [Increments and Decements](#incements-and-decrements)
    - [Shifts](#shifts)
    - [Jumps ans Calls](#jumps-and-calls)
    - [Branches](#branches)
    - [Status Flag Changes](#status-flag-changes)
    - [System Functions](#system-functions)
  - [Adressing Modes](#adressing-modes)
    - [Implict](#implict)
    - [Accumulator](#accumulator)
    - [Immediate](#immediate)
    - [Zero Page](#zero-page)
    - [Zero Page and X](#zero-page-and-x)
    - [Zero Page and Y](#zero-page-and-y)
    - [Relative](#relative)
    - [Absolute](#absolute)
    - [Absolute and X](#absolute-and-x)
    - [Absolute and Y](#absolute-and-y)
    - [Indirect](#indirect)
    - [Indexed Indirect](#indexed-indirect)
    - [Indirect Indexed](#indirect-indexed)
  - [Instruction Reference](#instruction-reference)

## Architecture

The 6502 microprocessor is a relatively simple 8 bit CPU with only a few internal registers capable of addressing at most 64Kb of memory via its 16 bit address bus. The processor is little endian and expects addresses to be stored in memory least significant byte first.

The first 256 byte page of memory (```$0000-$00FF```) is referred to as 'Zero Page' and is the focus of a number of special addressing modes that result in shorter (and quicker) instructions or allow indirect access to the memory. The second page of memory (```$0100-$01FF```) is reserved for the system stack and which cannot be relocated.

The only other reserved locations in the memory map are the very last 6 bytes of memory ```$FFFA``` to ```$FFFF``` which must be programmed with the addresses of the non-maskable interrupt handler (```$FFFA/B```), the power on reset location (```$FFFC/D```) and the BRK/interrupt request handler (```$FFFE/F```) respectively.

The 6502 does not have any special support of hardware devices so they must be mapped to regions of memory in order to exchange data with the hardware latches.

## Registers

The 6502 has only a small number of registers compared to other processor of the same era. This makes it especially challenging to program as algorithms must make efficient use of both registers and memory.

### Program Counter

The program counter is a 16 bit register which points to the next instruction to be executed. The value of program counter is modified automatically as instructions are executed.

The value of the program counter can be modified by executing a jump, a relative branch or a subroutine call to another memory address or by returning from a subroutine or interrupt.

### Stack Pointer

The processor supports a 256 byte stack located between $0100 and $01FF. The stack pointer is an 8 bit register and holds the low 8 bits of the next free location on the stack. The location of the stack is fixed and cannot be moved.

Pushing bytes to the stack causes the stack pointer to be decremented. Conversely pulling bytes causes it to be incremented.

The CPU does not detect if the stack is overflowed by excessive pushing or pulling operations and will most likely result in the program crashing.

### Accumulator

The 8 bit accumulator is used all arithmetic and logical operations (with the exception of increments and decrements). The contents of the accumulator can be stored and retrieved either from memory or the stack.

Most complex operations will need to use the accumulator for arithmetic and efficient optimisation of its use is a key feature of time critical routines.

### Index Register X

The 8 bit index register is most commonly used to hold counters or offsets for accessing memory. The value of the X register can be loaded and saved in memory, compared with values held in memory or incremented and decremented.

The X register has one special function. It can be used to get a copy of the stack pointer or change its value.

### Index Register Y

The Y register is similar to the X register in that it is available for holding counter or offsets memory access and supports the same set of memory load, save and compare operations as wells as increments and decrements. It has no special functions.

### Processor Status

As instructions are executed a set of processor flags are set or clear to record the results of the operation. This flags and some additional control flags are held in a special status register. Each flag has a single bit within the register.

Instructions exist to test the values of the various bits, to set or clear some of them and to push or pull the entire set to or from the stack.

#### Carry Flag

The carry flag is set if the last operation caused an overflow from bit 7 of the result or an underflow from bit 0. This condition is set during arithmetic, comparison and during logical shifts. It can be explicitly set using the 'Set Carry Flag' (```SEC```) instruction and cleared with 'Clear Carry Flag' (```CLC```).

#### Zero Flag

The zero flag is set if the result of the last operation as was zero.

#### Interrupt Disable

The interrupt disable flag is set if the program has executed a 'Set Interrupt Disable' (```SEI```) instruction. While this flag is set the processor will not respond to interrupts from devices until it is cleared by a 'Clear Interrupt Disable' (```CLI```) instruction.

#### Decimal Mode

While the decimal mode flag is set the processor will obey the rules of Binary Coded Decimal (```BCD```) arithmetic during addition and subtraction. The flag can be explicitly set using 'Set Decimal Flag' (```SED```) and cleared with 'Clear Decimal Flag' (```CLD```).

#### Break Command Bit

The break command bit is set when a ```BRK``` instruction has been executed and an interrupt has been generated to process it.

#### Overflow Flag

The overflow flag is set during arithmetic operations if the result has yielded an invalid 2's complement result (e.g. adding to positive numbers and ending up with a negative result: 64 + 64 => -128). It is determined by looking at the carry between bits 6 and 7 and between bit 7 and the carry flag.

#### Negative Flag

The negative flag is set if the result of the last operation had bit 7 set to a one.

## Instruction Set

The 6502 has a relatively basic set of instructions, many having similar functions (e.g. memory access, arithmetic, etc.). The following sections list the complete set of 56 instructions in functional groups.

### Load and Store Operations

These instructions transfer a single byte between memory and one of the registers. Load operations set the negative (```N```) and zero (```Z```) flags depending on the value of transferred. Store operations do not affect the flag settings.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |
| LDA      | Load Accumulator              | N, Z       |
| LDX      | Load X Register               | N, Z       |
| LDY      | Load Y Register               | N, Z       |
| STA      | Store Accumulator             |            |
| STX      | Store X Register              |            |
| STY      | Store Y Register              |            |

### Register Transfers

The contents of the ```X``` and ```Y``` registers can be moved to or from the accumulator, setting the negative (```N```) and zero (```Z```) flags as appropriate.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |

### Stack Operations

The 6502 microprocessor supports a 256 byte stack fixed between memory locations ```$0100``` and ```$01FF```. A special 8-bit register, ```S```, is used to keep track of the next free byte of stack space. Pushing a byte on to the stack causes the value to be stored at the current free location (e.g. ```$0100, S```) and then the stack pointer is post decremented. Pull operations reverse this procedure.

The stack register can only be accessed by transferring its value to or from the X register. Its value is automatically modified by push/pull instructions, subroutine calls and returns, interrupts and returns from interrupts.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |

### Logical

The following instructions perform logical operations on the contents of the accumulator and another value held in memory. The ```BIT``` instruction performs a logical ```AND``` to test the presence of bits in the memory value to set the flags but does not keep the result.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |

### Arithmetic

The arithmetic operations perform addition and subtraction on the contents of the accumulator. The compare operations allow the comparison of the accumulator and ```X``` or ```Y``` with memory values.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |

### Increments and Decrements

Increment or decrement a memory location or one of the ```X``` or ```Y``` registers by one setting the negative (```N```) and zero (```Z```) flags as appropriate.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |

### Shifts

Shift instructions cause the bits within either a memory location or the accumulator to be shifted by one bit position. The rotate instructions use the contents if the carry flag (```C```) to fill the vacant position generated by the shift and to catch the overflowing bit. The arithmetic and logical shifts shift in an appropriate 0 or 1 bit as appropriate but catch the overflow bit in the carry flag (```C```).

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |
| ASL      | Arithmetic Shift Left         | N, Z, C    |
| LSR      | Logical Shift Right           | N, Z, C    |
| ROL      | Rotate Left                   | N, Z, C    |
| ROR      | Rotate Right                  | N, Z, C    |

### Jumps and Calls

The following instructions modify the program counter causing a break to normal sequential execution. The ```JSR``` instruction pushes the old PC onto the stack before changing it to the new location allowing a subsequent ```RTS``` to return execution to the instruction after the call.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |
| JMP      | Jump to another location      |            |
| JSR      | Jump to a subroutine          |            |
| RTS      | Return from subroutine        |            |

### Branches

Branch instructions break the normal sequential flow of execution by changing the program counter if a specified condition is met. All the conditions are based on examining a single bit within the processor status.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |
| BCC      | Branch if carry flag clear    |            |
| BCS      | Branch if carry flag set      |            |
| BEQ      | Branch if zero flag set       |            |
| BMI      | Branch if negative flag set   |            |
| BNE      | Branch if zero flag clear     |            |
| BPL      | Branch if negative flag clear |            |
| BVC      | Branch if overflow flag clear |            |
| BVS      | Branch if overflow flag set   |            |

Branch instructions use relative address to identify the target instruction if they are executed. As relative addresses are stored using a signed 8 bit byte the target instruction must be within 126 bytes before the branch or 128 bytes after the branch.

### Status Flag Changes

The following instructions change the values of specific status flags.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |
| CLC      | Clear Carry Flag              | C          |
| CLD      | Clear Decimal Mode Flag       | D          |
| CLI      | Clear Interrupt Disable Flag  | I          |
| CLV      | Clear Overflow Flag           | V          |
| SEC      | Set Carry Flag                | C          |
| SED      | Set Decimal Mode Flag         | D          |
| SEI      | Set Interrupt Disable Flag    | I          |

### System Functions

The remaining instructions perform useful but rarely used functions.

| Mnemonic | Description                   | Used flags |
| ---      | ---                           | ---        |
| BRK      | Force an Interrupt            | N, Z       |
| NOP      | No Operation                  |            |
| RTI      | Return from Interrupt         | All        |

## Adressing Modes

The 6502 processor provides several ways in which memory locations can be addressed. Some instructions support several different modes while others may only support one. In addition the two index registers can not always be used interchangeably. This lack of orthogonality in the instruction set is one of the features that makes the 6502 trickier to program well.

### Implict

For many 6502 instructions the source and destination of the information to be manipulated is implied directly by the function of the instruction itself and no further operand needs to be specified. Operations like 'Clear Carry Flag' (```CLC```) and 'Return from Subroutine' (```RTS```) are implicit.

### Accumulator

### Immediate

### Zero Page

### Zero Page and X

### Zero Page and Y

### Absolute

### Absolute and X

### Absolute and Y

### Indirect

```JMP``` is the only 6502 instruction to support indirection. The instruction contains a 16 bit address which identifies the location of the least significant byte of another 16 bit memory address which is the real target of the instruction.

For example if location ```$0120``` contains ```$FC``` and location ```$0121``` contains ```$BA``` then the instruction ```JMP ($0120)``` will cause the next instruction execution to occur at ```$BAFC``` (e.g. the contents of ```$0120``` and ```$0121```).

```
JMP ($FFFC)     ; Force a power on reset
JMP (TARGET)    ; Jump via a labelled memory area
```

### Indexed Indirect

Indexed indirect addressing is normally used in conjunction with a table of address held on zero page. The address of the table is taken from the instruction and the X register added to it (with zero page wrap around) to give the location of the least significant byte of the target address.

```
LDA ($40, X)    ; Load a byte indirectly from memory
STA (MEM, X)    ; Store a accumulatior indirectly into memory
```

### Indirekt Indexed

Indirect indexed addressing is the most common indirection mode used on the 6502. In instruction contains the zero page location of the least significant byte of 16 bit address. The Y register is dynamically added to this value to generated the actual target address for operation.

```
LDA ($40), Y    ; Load a byte indirectly from memory
STA (DST), Y    ; Store a accumulatior indirectly into memory
```

## Instruction Reference

### ADC - Add with Carry

```
A, Z, C, N = A + M + C
```

This instruction adds the contents of a memory location to the accumulator together with the carry bit. If overflow occurs the carry bit is set, this enables multiple byte addition to be performed.

Processor Status after use:

| Flag | Description        | Status                       |
| ---  | ---                | ---                          |
| C    | Carry Flag         | Set if overflow in bit 7     |
| Z    | Zero Flag          | Set if A = 0                 |
| I    | Interrupt Dissable | Not affected                 |
| D    | Decimal Mode Flag  | Not affected                 |
| B    | Break Command      | Not affected                 |
| V    | Overflow Flag      | Set if sign bit is incorrect |
| N    | Negative Flag      | Set if bit 7 set             |

| Addressing Mode | Opcode | Bytes   | Cycles                        |
| ---             | ---    | ---     | ---                           |
| Immediate       | $69    | 2 Bytes | 2 Cycles                      |
| Zero Page       | $65    | 2 Bytes | 2 Cycles                      |
| Zero Page and X | $75    | 2 Bytes | 2 Cycles                      |
| Absolute        | $6D    | 3 Bytes | 2 Cycles                      |
| Absolute and X  | $7D    | 3 Bytes | 4 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |
| Absolute and Y  | $79    | 3 Bytes | 4 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |
| (Indirect, X)   | $61    | 2 Bytes | 6 Cycles                      |
| (Indirect), Y   | $71    | 2 Bytes | 5 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |

See also: [SBC](#sbc)

### AND - Logic AND

```
A, Z, N = A & M
```
A logical AND is performed, bit by bit, on the accumulator contents using the contents of a byte of memory.

Processor Status after use:

| Flag | Description        | Status                       |
| ---  | ---                | ---                          |
| C    | Carry Flag         | Not affected                 |
| Z    | Zero Flag          | Set if A = 0                 |
| I    | Interrupt Dissable | Not affected                 |
| D    | Decimal Mode Flag  | Not affected                 |
| B    | Break Command      | Not affected                 |
| V    | Overflow Flag      | Not affected                 |
| N    | Negative Flag      | Set if bit 7 set             |

| Addressing Mode | Opcode | Bytes   | Cycles                        |
| ---             | ---    | ---     | ---                           |
| Immediate       | $29    | 2 Bytes | 2 Cycles                      |
| Zero Page       | $25    | 2 Bytes | 3 Cycles                      |
| Zero Page and X | $35    | 2 Bytes | 4 Cycles                      |
| Absolute        | $2D    | 3 Bytes | 4 Cycles                      |
| Absolute and X  | $3D    | 3 Bytes | 4 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |
| Absolute and Y  | $99    | 3 Bytes | 4 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |
| (Indirect, X)   | $21    | 2 Bytes | 6 Cycles                      |
| (Indirect), Y   | $31    | 2 Bytes | 5 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |

See also: [EOR](#eor), [ORA](#ora)

### ASL - Arithmentic Shift Left

```
A, Z, C, N = M * 2 or M, Z, C, N = M * 2
```

This operation shifts all the bits of the accumulator or memory contents one bit left. Bit 0 is set to 0 and bit 7 is placed in the carry flag. The effect of this operation is to multiply the memory contents by 2 (ignoring 2's complement considerations), setting the carry if the result will not fit in 8 bits.

Processor Status after use:

| Flag | Description        | Status                            |
| ---  | ---                | ---                               |
| C    | Carry Flag         | Set to contents of old bit 7      |
| Z    | Zero Flag          | Set if A = 0                      |
| I    | Interrupt Dissable | Not affected                      |
| D    | Decimal Mode Flag  | Not affected                      |
| B    | Break Command      | Not affected                      |
| V    | Overflow Flag      | Not affected                      |
| N    | Negative Flag      | Set if bit 7 of the result is set |

| Addressing Mode | Opcode | Bytes   | Cycles   |
| ---             | ---    | ---     | ---      |
| Accumulator     | $0A    | 1 Bytes | 1 Cycles |
| Zero Page       | $06    | 2 Bytes | 5 Cycles |
| Zero Page and X | $16    | 2 Bytes | 6 Cycles |
| Absolute        | $0E    | 3 Bytes | 6 Cycles |
| Absolute and X  | $1E    | 3 Bytes | 7 Cycles |

See also: [LSR](#lsr), [ROL](#rol), [ROR](#ror)

### JMP - Jump

Sets the program counter to the address specified by the operand.

Processor Status after use:

| Flag | Description        | Status                            |
| ---  | ---                | ---                               |
| C    | Carry Flag         | Not affected                      |
| Z    | Zero Flag          | Not affected                      |
| I    | Interrupt Dissable | Not affected                      |
| D    | Decimal Mode Flag  | Not affected                      |
| B    | Break Command      | Not affected                      |
| V    | Overflow Flag      | Not affected                      |
| N    | Negative Flag      | Not affected                      |

| Addressing Mode | Opcode | Bytes   | Cycles   |
| ---             | ---    | ---     | ---      |
| Absolute        | $4C    | 3 Bytes | 3 Cycles |
| Indirect        | $6C    | 3 Bytes | 5 Cycles |

An original 6502 has does not correctly fetch the target address if the indirect vector falls on a page boundary (e.g. ```$xxFF``` where xx is any value from ```$00``` to ```$FF```). In this case fetches the LSB from ```$xxFF``` as expected but takes the MSB from ```$xx00```. This is fixed in some later chips like the 65SC02 so for compatibility always ensure the indirect vector is not at the end of the page.

### JSR - Jump to Subroutine

The JSR instruction pushes the address (minus one) of the return point on to the stack and then sets the program counter to the target memory address.

Processor Status after use:

| Flag | Description        | Status                            |
| ---  | ---                | ---                               |
| C    | Carry Flag         | Not affected                      |
| Z    | Zero Flag          | Not affected                      |
| I    | Interrupt Dissable | Not affected                      |
| D    | Decimal Mode Flag  | Not affected                      |
| B    | Break Command      | Not affected                      |
| V    | Overflow Flag      | Not affected                      |
| N    | Negative Flag      | Not affected                      |

| Addressing Mode | Opcode | Bytes   | Cycles   |
| ---             | ---    | ---     | ---      |
| Absolute        | $20    | 3 Bytes | 6 Cycles |

See also: [RTS](#rts)

### LDA - Load Accumulator

```
A, Z, N = M
```

Loads a byte of memory into the accumulator setting the zero and negative flags as appropriate.

Processor Status after use:

| Flag | Description        | Status                       |
| ---  | ---                | ---                          |
| C    | Carry Flag         | Not affected                 |
| Z    | Zero Flag          | Set if A = 0                 |
| I    | Interrupt Dissable | Not affected                 |
| D    | Decimal Mode Flag  | Not affected                 |
| B    | Break Command      | Not affected                 |
| V    | Overflow Flag      | Not affected                 |
| N    | Negative Flag      | Set if bit 7 of A is set     |

| Addressing Mode | Opcode | Bytes   | Cycles                        |
| ---             | ---    | ---     | ---                           |
| Immediate       | $A9    | 2 Bytes | 2 Cycles                      |
| Zero Page       | $A5    | 2 Bytes | 3 Cycles                      |
| Zero Page and X | $B5    | 2 Bytes | 4 Cycles                      |
| Absolute        | $AD    | 3 Bytes | 4 Cycles                      |
| Absolute and X  | $BD    | 3 Bytes | 4 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |
| Absolute and Y  | $B9    | 3 Bytes | 4 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |
| (Indirect, X)   | $A1    | 2 Bytes | 6 Cycles                      |
| (Indirect), Y   | $B1    | 2 Bytes | 5 Cycles (+1 if page crossed) |

See also: [LDX](#ldx), [LDY](#ldy)